[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
The afterlife is
a source of great
mystery to human beings.
Throughout every
culture in history,
they've had their own
understanding of what
that experience is like.
Mark Mirabello has been
digging deep into this research
in his book, called
"A Traveler's Guide
to the Afterlife."
We're starting this conversation
with a strange dedication
at the front of this book.
So if you don't
mind, Mark, I'm going
to read it, because
I thought, what--
what is he talking-- what
does he mean by this?
Right?
>>MARK MIRABELLO:
Yes, very good.
>>REGINA: I love it.
OK.
"In an underground Mithraic
temple in Sarrebourg, France,
archaeologists discovered
a human skeleton chained
to the altar.
The door was found blocked,
so the nameless follower
of Mithras had died
alone in the darkness.
To the unknown individual who
was murdered for his religion,
I dedicate this book."
And I thought, wow,
that is powerful.
No less than Mithraic tradition.
What was this about?
>>MIRABELLO: Well, the
message was, first of all,
I thought it was an
interesting hook, so to speak,
that would draw the reader in.
>>REGINA: It did.
>>MIRABELLO: And I was trying
to make the point that we were
going to, in the course of
the book, through the travel,
if you will, study all
kinds of traditions.
There is a tendency to assume
that right way/wrong way,
wrong way/right way.
But the book, I try to explore
many, many, many different
traditions.
We know about 3,500
known societies.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>MIRABELLO: And I
also try to study
even some extinct
religions and so forth.
So modern religions
are discussed,
traditional religions
dead religions are discussed,
and in fact, I also
tried to include a few
points from sciences.
And even for-- people would
discover while reading
the book, even if
there is no God--
I'm not trying to say that--
even if we do not have
an immortal soul--
I am not trying to say that--
it's possible that we have
a continued existence.
And so I thought--
and also the powerful message
of the way that person died.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MIRABELLO: And I should
throw in that because scholars
dislike the sensational, many
anthropologists have tried
to argue, and historians, that
that's not as it appears--
that that body was placed
there to contaminate the site.
It was a sacred site to Mithras.
And by putting a
body in there, they
were driving out the demon.
Because in monotheism,
there is only a god.
Everything else is demonic.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MIRABELLO: But I
disagree with that.
Clearly this was someone
who was murdered.
And every religion
can have its martyrs.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
And the Mithraic
tradition is one
that's been largely
lost to humanity today,
so it has a lot of interesting
historical connotations
as well.
And getting into
this whole subject,
we can't do that without
getting into you a little bit.
And you say toward the
beginning of the book
that you have cancer.
>>MIRABELLO: It's really
curious, because all my life,
I've been interested in
the history of thought.
And this is the really
ultimate question--
what happens to us when we die.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>MIRABELLO: And after
my father's death,
this really was the final spark
to start working in this area,
because frankly I wanted to
see him again, and my mother.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MIRABELLO: And I thought,
we must prepare for this.
And then in the course
of the research,
I discovered I had cancer.
It's multiple myeloma,
which is a blood cancer.
>>REGINA: Just tell us what
that is and how that works.
>>MIRABELLO: It's
just a blood cancer.
It can--
>>REGINA: Is it kind
of like leukemia?
>>MIRABELLO: It's a cousin
of it, very similar.
They're different.
And oddly enough-- and I
consider myself educated--
I'd never heard of it
till I had the diagnosis.
And initially the symptoms
are rather curious.
That's what brought
me to the doctor--
>>REGINA: What were they?
>>MIRABELLO: My eye was
starting to bulge, my left eye.
And literally at one
point, when I would blink,
the eyelashes were
touching my spectacles.
And then also, I developed what
I thought was a stiff neck.
Now, it turned out, because
this attacks the bones,
I have-- in fact, even now
I've got a broken neck,
and I'm just living with it.
And the eye, they were
actually able to treat that.
It was sort of a blood
tumor behind the eye.
And it was quite
remarkable, because I
went through a period of
this radiation therapy.
And without losing any
sight or even altering--
>>REGINA: Amazing.
>>MIRABELLO: --my eye
went back to normal.
Now, before that
happened, I starting
to look like a 1950s
cheap horror film.
And I think, oddly
enough, that's
what brought me into
the doctor's office,
because I always joke,
I don't mind being sick
as long as I look good.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
Better to look good
than feel good, right?
>>MIRABELLO: Yes, yes.
So that brought me
in and in a sense
saved my life, because
they can't cure it,
but they can control it.
And they're giving me these
really expensive drugs.
And I've been able to complete
the book, buy a house,
get married, and--
>>REGINA: You've done it all.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes, yes.
>>REGINA: Do you think that
living with that condition
at the base of your
life and knowing--
you're not sure
exactly how it's going
to turn out, except
that you can manage it
and you are managing it.
You've already outlived what
they thought to begin with.
Do you think that that inspired
you to dive into life so deeply
and with such relish?
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
In a sense, it made
me grow up, because I
was a bachelor all those years.
And I was living in an
apartment with literally
plastic furniture.
I was sitting on lawn furniture.
And it made me grow up.
I found the perfect woman
that I had loved for years,
and she loved me.
And it just, I thought--
we have to grow up and make
this choice.
And the houses, I couldn't
have put my perfect wife
in the ugly apartment.
>>REGINA: And it was
lawn chair furniture.
No, I don't think she
would have stuck around.
>>MIRABELLO: That's
the furniture too.
That's her influence.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
So it really pushed you into
making some bold decisions,
stepping up into life, which
you hear about a lot with people
who, for example, find they
actually have a very short time
to live.
It's like they start
living suddenly
like a bat out of
hell, everything
they've held back
from themselves.
And I find that journey
itself fascinating.
I did something similar.
It was crazy.
When I was 27 years old,
I didn't know anything
about anything,
except that I knew
if there were any
lumps anywhere,
you were going to die.
I thought I knew that, right?
And I was on a trip in Europe.
And I discovered this.
And I thought, oh
my god, this is
the first couple of
days of the trip,
and I had three weeks to go.
And I didn't say
anything to anyone.
But of course, falling asleep at
night, I'm gonna be dying soon.
And I did live like
a bat out of hell.
I did anything I wanted.
And I cried when I said
goodbye to my sister, thinking,
oh, I'll never see her again.
It was really quite a
dramatic 27-year-old scenario
that was all in my head.
As it turned out,
it was nothing.
But just brushing up
with the potential of it
showed me how I'd been
holding back in my own life.
>>MIRABELLO: 27.
That was three years ago?
>>REGINA: Yeah, three years ago.
Exactly, in a couple of months.
So it sounds like
in a more sane way,
you chose to mature into
the things you've been
holding yourself back from.
>>MIRABELLO: It's
probably my personality.
I know it's
difficult to believe,
as I tell my college
students, I'm not a partier.
Although I do tell them on
occasion regarding dance,
I like to shake it
out on occasion.
>>REGINA: Yeah, there you go.
So you shook it
out, and you married
this beautiful, beautiful woman.
And she seems like
an angel herself.
>>MIRABELLO: Oh, yes.
>>REGINA: And so here you are.
And so how did that
play into your writing
this book, that
sense of mortality?
>>MIRABELLO: Oh.
Well, it basically focused--
I have a tendency to
never stop the research.
I just keep going
and going and going.
And this convinced
me that I had to--
I literally thought
at one point,
they gave me as little,
as few as two years.
So I thought I'd
better finish this.
So it put some fire under me,
and I started to focus and say,
this has to stop.
My trouble is, I do
everything backward
when it comes to research.
Most people will first pitch
the idea, sell the book.
I don't do that.
I write the book.
And plus, I never
know how the book
will be until it's finished,
because it grows organically.
And so this is why
this one-- which
I'm really proud of, because
I view all these as children.
And this is a special child.
>>REGINA: It is indeed, and a
tremendous amount of research
embedded in here.
This is amazing.
So after you went through
all of this research
and you delved into the
different countries and belief
systems, what was the
thing that maybe popped out
and surprised you most
within this research?
>>MIRABELLO: To tell the truth,
I don't think I was surprised.
Because I've been doing this so
long and reading this so long,
and perhaps there's a sense of--
just like the
heroin addict who's
constantly taking the drug,
it's difficult to get the rush.
And so I realized going
in that there's just
a wide number of traditions.
Buddha talks about 84,000
paths to enlightenment.
And what I was trying to
do, though, is simplify.
So many professors
complicate things.
They take the simple
and complicate it
and think that's
intellectualism.
>>REGINA: Right.
It's not.
>>MIRABELLO: I like to take
the complex and make it simple.
And that's--
>>REGINA: Congratulations.
I thank you on behalf of
all your students for that.
>>MIRABELLO: But by the way,
another point in the book,
I never really try to--
I hope I succeed in this--
sell any agenda, that I
want equal treatment
of everything,
because I think people
should have information
to make an informed choice.
And that's what I was
trying to achieve.
>>REGINA: You did.
You didn't load it
any direction at all.
But what you did is toward
the beginning of the book,
you had all these assumptions
that we, across the world,
have about death itself.
What happens after
death, in the afterlife?
And so what I
thought we'd do is go
into some of those assumptions.
You have 50 of them.
We can't do all 50 of them.
So I just kind of picked
and chose, so to speak.
So let's start into them.
And the first one I have here
is that, number one, the dead,
don't assume-- so every one of
these sentences will begin with
"don't assume that"--
the death experience is
the same for everyone.
Right?
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
>>REGINA: And that's
pretty much acknowledged
by just the breadth
of your research.
Now let's go into the specifics.
Don't assume that the dead know
where they are once they've
passed out of the physical.
Tell us about that for a bit.
>>MIRABELLO: That's
an interesting point.
I think we often ignore that.
And again, when you're talking
from Eastern traditions,
they understand
this automatically.
This was more of
a Western setback.
Because they point
out, they believe
in transmigration of souls.
But they don't remember
their previous lives.
But they also talk
about someone may
be in a hellish
existence-- for example,
in Hinduism and Buddhism--
and not really realize
what got them there, just
as, for example, if someone
is born, the famous statement,
a young girl in the palace
of kings, which is supposed
to be a positive rebirth,
she won't remember what
she did to get there.
And when she's there,
there's also the issue of,
we have no idea, in
fact, where we are now.
There's a Greek notion
I also refer to,
Euripides said, we
could be dead now,
that the Cathars in the Middle
Ages, who were considered
a medieval heresy, they thought,
actually, this is really hell.
>>REGINA: This is hell,
and the other side is life.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
And it's very possible
that we could be--
when we die here,
we so fear death,
but we could be going to life.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MIRABELLO: And they
notice, for example--
the ancient Greeks,
in particular,
notice that, oddly enough,
the most traumatic experience,
unless we die in a
really colorful way,
the most horrifying experience
we've had will be our births.
Now, we tend, properly speaking,
to focus on the mother,
because it's really
traumatic for the mother.
But the child also goes
through horrible trauma.
He's in a dark, warm,
protected place,
and then suddenly he's
thrust into this place of--
>>REGINA: Separation.
>>MIRABELLO: --light,
noise, so forth.
And so the Greeks thought--
and they also, I should
mention, pointed out that death,
strangely enough, especially
violent deaths-- now, again,
not to encourage the
audience to do this--
appear to be
virtually pleasurable.
And in fact they will
notice that soldiers
on the battlefield will die
in a state of sexual arousal.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I read that.
Tell us a little bit about what
the Greeks said was actually
happening at this point of
leaving the body in this highly
charged--
obviously, there's a lot
of adrenaline in battle,
for example.
What did they say this?
>>MIRABELLO: Well, oddly enough,
there's a widespread notion--
now, it's not universal.
Some cultures will endorse the
natural death from old age,
dying in your sleep
is the best way.
But many cultures argue that
a violent death-- now again,
not to encourage this
with the audience.
But a violent death releases
the soul in a purer state.
Heraclitus refers to this.
And it's more powerful.
Now, in contrast,
in Nigeria, there's
the idea that if someone
who dies of old age
has a strong soul because
they've lived so long--
so again, we don't know
the correct answer.
But there is-- and I should
mention, I do refer to this.
Oftentimes, there seems
to be, you could argue,
an agenda going on,
especially attached to ethics.
They're encouraging
certain behavior patterns.
A warrior culture, the Aztecs--
>>REGINA: They're going to
elevate the experience of death
at the end of a sword,
a bayonet, or whatnot.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
The Aztecs, Medieval Vikings.
Medieval Vikings refer to
the straw death with disdain.
It's old age or sickness in bed.
They slept on straw.
So they're trying--
>>REGINA: That's a very
good point you're making.
It's a social statement.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes So I
kind of caution regarding
this ethical component.
In fact, we don't really see
ethics appear in the afterlife
until you reach the
civilizations, which
makes it rather suspicious.
Not that it's not true.
I'm not trying to say
people go out there and sin
because they read it
in my book, it's OK.
But there seems to be
a connection that--
because ordinary
poor people will say,
like, why is this person
wealthy and beautiful,
and I'm ugly and misery
and living in squalor?
But if society teaches
them, well, just be strong
and in the next life,
that rich, powerful person
will be miserable
and you'll be happy.
But it is rather
suspicious that it
does seem to enter
when civilization does.
And also what's
rather curious is--
and I think Americans are
especially prone to this,
and Western Europeans--
we assume, like Immanuel
Kant and Socrates,
moral absolutism,
that what is good
is always good in every context.
But that's not the case.
It's a function of how we live.
Being humble and
loving and nonviolent
will not work if you're
an Eskimo or Inuit
hunter in the Arctic
in the 18th century.
You're on the edge of
death, people depend on you.
And you must be violent.
>>REGINA: It's more a
matter of civilization,
civilizing society so they can
get on together peacefully.
But that isn't appropriate
in all situations.
That's what you're saying.
>>MIRABELLO: Exactly.
>>REGINA: And this
would carry over
into the death scenario
as well then, right?
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
And for example, in
our culture, the death
in honor of-- let's
say, a generous death.
That would be probably the
highest in the Judeo-Christian
tradition, where you die on
behalf of someone else to save
them--
which you also see in
Buddhism, for example.
That brings you-- if
your last thing you do
is to help someone
else, you will be
reborn as a god or a goddess.
By the way, you
can switch genders.
You won't always be female,
I won't always be male.
And while I'm on
it, I should mention
there's a lot of confusion
regarding reincarnation
in the West and
transmigration of souls.
We're too linear about it.
We think that, for
example, our next lives
will be in the future.
But the Hindus call
it Brahma time.
All time exists simultaneously--
past, present, and future.
Somewhere your
great-great-grandfather
is a two-year-old.
Somewhere you're 14 years old.
Somewhere you're much older.
Somewhere--
>>REGINA: So these incarnations
are existing simultaneously?
>>MIRABELLO: Well, what can
happen is your next life,
you may be actually
a Roman soldier
standing at the foot of
the cross, your next life.
Your next life,
you may be actually
2,000 years in the future
on a Martian colony.
You can be born any
time, any place.
In fact, in the
East, they actually
think there are other inhabited
worlds, and you may go there.
Now, there's another
important point,
is your next life tends to
be-- especially Buddhism, it's
really clear, is determined
by your very last thing--
so you talked about death.
What you're doing
at the end will
determine your very next life.
Now, you normally don't escape
karmic consequences, they say.
So if you commit a
crime, you will be
paying for that at some point.
But let's say you are--
I shouldn't say you.
Let's say someone
is a serial killer
and has killed many,
many people and
committed horrible atrocities.
If at the very end he's
rescuing a four-year-old child
from a fire and
dies as a result,
he can come back as a
god in the next life.
Now, that's rather
curious to us,
because we tend to have this
idea that you live one life,
and it'll be added up and
subtracted, good and evil,
and you go forever
into heaven or hell.
In Jainism, the future
pathfinder, the Jains,
which come from India,
they teach at some point,
humans will become so
corrupt-- and by the way,
they think of time as circular--
humans will become so corrupt
that religion will disappear,
we will be three feet
tall, we'll live 18 years,
and we'll be totally ignorant.
We'll be like animals.
>>REGINA: Yikes.
That's real dystopian future.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
When the circle
of time continues,
it starts to improve.
And one of the--
there's 24 pathfinders.
They're kind of
similar to prophets
in the Western tradition, except
they don't get information
from a god.
They discover it, kind of like
the way we think of science.
And the next pathfinder
when the cycle returns,
right now he's in
hell for a crime.
And one thing that I always
was interested in in some
of these traditions is you're
never beyond redemption.
You can always, shall we
say-- you may be punished
for a crime, but
the Buddhist hell
lasts 590 million years for
the most heinous crimes,
but eventually you're out.
And I should mention, even
in Christian tradition
you see this.
The Mormons, Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints,
have the concept, you
can escape from hell.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MIRABELLO: You can convert.
>>REGINA: I found
that interesting.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
So the idea that you're
never beyond redemption--
>>REGINA: Now, that's a
beautiful universal thought,
though, that each one of
these religions, no matter how
harsh and punishing
some of them may be,
do believe that there is
time and there is grace.
And one can always
recover themselves.
>>MIRABELLO: Well, not to insert
my own ideas into the book,
but I have a feeling it's more--
I like to think that, that
we can always, shall we say,
repair the damage we've done.
And by the way, I
should mention--
this is often misunderstood
in the West as well-- people
realize that we have literally
billions or trillions of lives,
according to the Hindus
the Jains, the Buddhists.
>>REGINA: Their time
frames are so extensive,
it's in the trillions of years.
>>MIRABELLO: And every completed
act produces a complete life.
So right now, during
this life, you're
producing thousands
of other lives.
And that's why you get some
traditions, such as Diamond
Vehicle Buddhism, which
you find in Tibet,
they try to, in a sense--
I don't mean to be funny by
this, but game the system,
and escape in one life.
There are teaching
techniques to escape all
of these future consequences.
But I think most Westerners
think that there's--
again, thinking in our terms--
that an individual lives
his, let's say, 90 years,
and then they subtract
good and evil.
And that produces one life.
It's thousands and
thousands of lives.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
This whole notion-- again,
this is very Western--
of thinking that we're
on a type of a soul
progression of sorts--
that you refined this
part of your thinking
or your actions or
your life, and then
that takes you onto
another opportunity
to refine another part.
And so it's kind of
like this flowing upward
and onward into more
refinement, a potential
for a different kind of choice
down the road somewhere.
But what you're saying,
if I'm understanding it,
is all these time frames are
happening simultaneously.
If you're dipping into
what we know is the past
and what we know
is the future, how
could there be a progression
of anything, so to speak?
>>MIRABELLO: Well, that's where
you get into these problems.
By the way, the progression,
especially found
in a really modernist
faith, which oddly enough
comes from around
the Baha'i faith,
which I really don't discuss
at length, because it's
so modernist.
And most people
just-- it's talking
about equal rights and no racism
and feminism and so forth.
>>REGINA: It's very Utopian.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes, yes.
And in fact, even
Christian Scientists
have a similar notion.
I don't really get into--
I do have one quote from
them, but it's basically
this idea of suffering is
not real, death is not real,
we're going to progress.
But it's unclear.
Now incidentally,
I should mention,
because I don't mean to
indicate that I'm just
talking about some of
these unusual ideas,
but Emanuel Swedenborg, which
I talk about in the book,
he gives a really--
those interested in
Christian traditions,
he's a really interesting
person to discuss,
or I should say
read, 18th century.
And he gave all these
detailed descriptions as well
as-- because we
just talked earlier,
how can heaven and
hell exist forever?
He has a really
rational explanation
in a Christian context
how that could occur.
>>REGINA: Yeah, share that.
Because I have him on the
list to ask you about.
>>MIRABELLO: The notion is--
and by the way, I even mentioned
the really infamous character,
Aleister Crowley, who actually
coins the term "drug fiend."
He was a pansexual, having
sex with everything,
including animals.
>>REGINA: Not my
favorite character.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
He talks about how he'd
be miserable in heaven
because he likes the wild
women and the crimes.
And oddly enough, Swedenborg
says that we actually gravitate
according to our ruling love.
And I think he's right
on that, in one sense,
that not everybody is the same.
And oddly enough, there
are, shall we say,
Hell's Angels
types that would be
miserable in a traditional
Christian heaven.
>>REGINA: Not enough
simulation, perhaps.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
And they kind of like biker
bars and they like fistfights
and they like the wild girls.
And other people like
the more placid life.
Well, according to Swedenborg--
he says that when
we die, most of us
go to a world of spirits
for about 30 years,
where we see loved
ones and so forth.
But over time, we then
gravitate towards a ruling love.
And he describes these
really clear visions
of heavens where
there are actually
beautiful homes and
clear, nice beautiful
pastures and blue skies,
and all of these good people
are living there.
They even have a
government, and so forth.
And they're doing
good, and they're
very placid and peaceful.
Then he describes these--
really, what look to us,
like almost violent crime--
>>REGINA: Hellish realms, yes.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
They look like urban
centers, and people there
are raping and attacking
and doing violence.
And he said, just
as, for example,
a frog would be miserable in
a beautiful spring pasture,
he wants the swamp with its
slime and stench and insects
that he can eat.
An evil person will gravitate
towards a hellish realm,
because that's what he wants.
And according to
Swedenborg, it's
not a god who sends us there.
We're actually doing
that, going there.
>>REGINA: Yes,
it's our own field
of residence, what
we are already
relating to energetically.
And you know, I've
read this before.
So he's saying that
the death realm may not
look all that different
to the living realm
because you're going
to be gravitating
toward the same
kind of experience.
And I remember reading Ruth
Montgomery's "The World Beyond"
many, many years ago.
And this one sad little scene
really struck me in the book,
where Arthur Ford is telling
her his observations over there.
And it was about a woman who
had a very dull life, who
really, she spent a lot of
time ironing, ironing clothing.
And that on the
other side, the woman
had no idea where she
was, what was going on.
She just ironed
all day every day.
And I thought, ay, ay.
That's kind of what you'd
want to get away from.
But the point that
Swedenborg is making
is, no, what you are persists.
>>MIRABELLO: And oddly enough,
he also makes the point
that the dead, because
we've been conditioned
to think the other
world is very different,
that many dead people
don't realize they're dead.
>>REGINA: That's what I was
asking about originally.
They don't know that
this has happened.
There's no real
awareness, right?
>>MIRABELLO: Yes, exactly.
He has a wonderful
passage, I refer to it,
where he has a group
of freethinking,
atheistic, scientific
types, having a meeting
in a hellish realm, where
they're talking about God
doesn't exist and
there's no immortal soul
and there's no afterlife.
And they're having
these lectures on it.
And they don't realize
they're actually
dead and in a hellish realm.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
There is a part of you wrote
about-- it cracked me up.
I found it so interesting.
Some belief systems say
the other side is really
no different from this side.
Maybe just a little less
materially physical.
But I was reading the part about
where the Chinese belief is,
that's why you have
to have your coins
and your money stored up
to take to the other side
so you can make your bribes
on the other side too,
to bribe favor.
I thought it was--
I mean, obviously
from my standpoint,
I find it interesting,
but also kind of amusing.
>>MIRABELLO: It will
be just as it is here.
And by the way, it's
interesting too that--
>>REGINA: Gotta
bribe the officials.
>>MIRABELLO: --the
Chinese have the concept
that you must behave
yourself over there,
because if you misbehave,
you'll be thrown out.
We tend to think
it's a one-way trip--
especially in the West, I should
say, not so much in the East--
that once you qualify,
you've passed your ACT test,
and you're admitted
into the place,
to use a university metaphor,
that you're there to stay.
But in fact, that's
not the case.
Which reminds me too,
the ancient Egyptians
had this wonderful concept
that it's a continuous journey.
And every night
you may be killed.
And that's why they went
to such great lengths
to prepare the dead person.
And they have salvation
by magic, in a sense.
The dead person is equipped
with magical words of power.
And every morning, he's--
in fact, this is originally
the sun god does this--
he's born from the womb of
his mother, the sky goddess.
And he travels across the
celestial Nile, which they
view as a river in the sky.
And then every night
he dies in the arms
of his mother, the sky goddess.
And then he has to
go through the--
>>REGINA: Through the
descent of darkness,
back to the daylight again.
>>MIRABELLO: And he goes
through nine or 12 gates guarded
by monsters, and
he needs passwords,
and he needs to
know their names.
That's a really
common idea in magic--
the name controls the thing.
In the Old Testament,
no one is allowed
to know the name of
Yahweh or Jehovah.
We don't even know
how it's pronounced
because it was secret, we think
it was because it was sacred,
but it almost certainly
is from a magical concept.
If you know the name, even of
a god, you can control him.
>>REGINA: Right, interesting.
>>MIRABELLO: So the
deceased-- and by the way,
another interesting thing
about the Egyptians,
their afterlife is
actually here, in a sense.
Because if you have the
proper magical rituals,
you join the sun
god in this journey,
you must know the passwords.
You must pass
through the dangers.
And then you're born
into this world again.
Well, not physically born,
but you're here again
among the living.
Because Egyptians, the family
idea triumphs over the grave.
We find this in many
cultures-- the Chinese,
the Ancient Romans, Greeks.
They wanted to be
with their families.
And they will live here
in the daylight-- well,
I should say, exist
here, not live--
and then they go through
the process each night.
And they thought we were not
by nature immortal, which
is interesting.
They also thought on Earth we
weren't by nature immortal.
You're killed by
magic, essentially.
Now, if you're
shot by a gun, it's
because someone put a
hex on you, typically.
But then just
you're killed here,
even though it's not natural.
And then in the next world, you
can also survive through magic.
>>REGINA: Well, let's
talk about that.
There's another
one in there that I
found absolutely fascinating.
And it was the
aboriginal understanding
of what happens in death and
the whole process of sleeping
on the dead's head, a close
family member, for three days
after the death following
the smoke and so forth.
Can you explain that
whole thing to us?
It's really interesting.
>>MIRABELLO: The
Egyptians-- and I
should mention the aboriginal
people and the Egyptians share
the same concept that you're not
by nature immortal, in a sense.
Well, let me clarify this--
that all death is caused by--
is caused, I should say.
>>REGINA: They don't think death
is a natural effect in life.
>>MIRABELLO: Right, that's
what I meant to say.
>>REGINA: It has to be
caused by something.
>>MIRABELLO: Right.
Now, in their case--
and now, incidentally,
the British
arrived in the 18th century.
They disparage these
people because they
didn't have the bow and arrow,
they've never seen water boil,
they were naked, they
couldn't count beyond three,
because they had no need to.
And much like the
modern Americans,
we judge on how
many-- technology.
>>REGINA: Very
arrogant, a big mistake.
Because they had magic.
>>MIRABELLO: And also,
what's interesting
about the aboriginal
people, especially
the central
Australians that were
in the desert, really
inhospitable areas
of Australia, because they
were preserving really
ancient ideas, almost certainly
the ideas from the dawn
of the human race.
Now, as Americans, most people
think new is good, old is bad.
But that's not really true.
Old can indicate the truth
that has become corrupted.
And they talked
about-- for example,
they thought, again,
as we just mentioned,
that no death was
really natural.
So every death was a murder.
So there were rituals.
That's what they're doing
about sleeping on the head.
Another one was--
>>REGINA: You didn't die
unless somebody was putting
some bad or black juju on you.
>>MIRABELLO: Right.
And then also, another one was,
not only sleeping on the head
and then dreaming of
who killed this person,
but also they would burn the
body and then follow the smoke
and oddly enough kill the
first person they encountered.
>>REGINA: That, I
thought, was harsh.
When I read that, I thought, ay.
I mean, they just assumed that
wherever the smoke was leading
them was to the murderer.
>>MIRABELLO: Right.
Now, by the way, 18th,
19th century British types
were looking at this
saying, how backward is this
and how savage?
I remind people, though,
that the aboriginal people
apparently were
there from 50,000 BC.
If they were the only
people on the planet,
they would be here indefinitely.
You know, we're ending
up destroying the planet,
destroying this place we
live, and oddly enough,
even overpopulation.
I don't mean to say we go
back to this killing people
every time someone dies.
But their numbers
are really stable.
>>REGINA: Well, they were
living in complete harmony
with not only nature
and an elemental world,
but also with spiritual worlds
and the worlds of ancestors.
And I've read some
rare documents
on the way they used magic
and the actual processes
of magic they used
that are very real.
And certainly, I can understand
why the white man, when
he first encounters
this, would think,
this might just look
savage in a way.
But they are much more in tune
with the processes of life
than we are.
>>MIRABELLO: And by the
way, I should mention,
we talked about the Caucasians
viewing these people,
it got so savage among the
white side, in Tasmania--
now incidentally, in Tasmania,
they were kind of cut off.
They had forgotten
how to make fire.
That's, again-- there's
been a couple of cultures
in the 19th century,
they had no idea.
The Andaman Islanders
in the Bay of Bengal,
and the aboriginal
people in Tasmania,
they would keep it burning,
but they couldn't make it.
And the British
just dismissed this,
like, how savage can this be?
And they organized
aboriginal hunts,
where even ministers
would participate,
hunting them as if they were
killing deer, which even today,
some people object to that.
But these were humans.
And it's a shame that we tend
to judge on material things.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Do you think there might
have even been some fear?
Because they do
have these powers
that seem to transcend anything
that the white man is aware of.
I mean, we've read the books,
we've seen the films, even,
on what happened to the
Aboriginals in Australia
and taken away,
separated from family,
put in a very rigid Western
type of educational system that
is completely the opposite
of the way they're
able to function in life.
Do you think there's fear there?
>>MIRABELLO: Well, oddly
enough, 19th century Europeans
in general and Americans,
we forget this.
And again, I'll mention
it as a historian.
They were so arrogant,
they were convinced
that they had the answers.
So a lot of this abuse
of Aboriginal people,
as the Native
Americans over here,
is everything the
Europeans were witnessing
was just savage and backward.
You see similar things
occurring in Africa.
And they wanted to root it out.
Now, of course, infamously
you had the Spanish experience
in Central and South America
destroying these cultures.
They were absolutely convinced
that they were helping them.
And incidentally,
I remind people,
it's so easy to
judge to the past.
We do the same thing today.
We forget that even when we
export Peace Corps workers--
not to criticize these young
people and old people now
helping others in
their own mind--
but we're corrupting
other societies sometimes.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>MIRABELLO: Now,
in contrast, India
has preserved hunters
and gatherers,
horticulturalists, farmers,
all the way up to-- they
have the space program
and nuclear weapons.
And I often joke in my classes,
if aliens were to come here,
they wouldn't visit
New York City.
They would go to India,
because it's a museum piece.
Everything has been preserved.
And George Catlin, who is
a 19th century American,
went out into the Great Plains
and other places in the 1830s.
He really admired the way of
life of the bison hunters.
And he talks about, it's a shame
these people will be destroyed.
And instead of setting up
places like Yellowstone National
Park, why we couldn't
have walled off
Nebraska-- or I should say,
part of Texas and so forth--
and let those people
live their lives.
Because we've corrupted
Native Americans as well.
>>REGINA: We have.
I mean, the government gave
them some reservation land,
but it's really not
a good way they've
been forced to live at all.
>>MIRABELLO: And again, we
can't blame the British,
because we do the same thing.
>>REGINA: Oh, absolutely.
We're right up there.
We're their spawn.
This brings me to another point.
And that is, do not assume,
if heaven does exist,
that you're going to stay there
and hang out there forever.
>>MIRABELLO: Exactly.
That's a really common
one in the West.
It's possible that's the case,
but it's rather interesting,
for example, in these
Eastern traditions,
even if you come
back as a god, you
have all kinds of
bliss and power,
they always fall because
they're corrupted.
If you're reborn as
a god or goddess,
you have so much bliss and
power, you're corrupted
and you'll fall.
>>REGINA: You're bound
to overextend, exploit,
or whatnot?
>>MIRABELLO: Yes,
it's just simply--
>>REGINA: We can't
win for losing.
>>MIRABELLO: Exactly.
>>REGINA: If you come back
as a bug, it's one thing.
If you come back
as a god, you're
going to be tempted
into another fall.
>>MIRABELLO: Right.
And it's kind of curious.
We often, in our pop culture--
for example, the
legendary TV series,
"Dallas," we show what money
and power can do to people
and if you can indulge
all of your wishes.
But we often forget, what
happens if we go to heaven,
and we have this
perfect happiness,
and everything we want is there?
>>REGINA: Do we start
itching for some drama?
>>MIRABELLO: Yeah,
could it corrupt us?
There's a famous
statement against--
I think it was Nietzsche
says, against boredom, even
the gods struggle in vain.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MIRABELLO: So it's possible
that it could be very
different, and it may change.
Won't be forever.
≫>REGINA: Well, and
these creative beings,
beings with the ability to
create, you would think that--
that would make a
good argument for what
you're saying,
that ultimately you
would have a need to express
yourself in a new way again.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
>>REGINA: And that this would
keep the tension or whatnot
moving forward, so
you would continue
this wheel of incarnations.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
And look at the creator
of Harry Potter.
She may be the first
novelist to have
become a billionaire through
creating these characters.
Now she's bored, wants
to do some other things.
That's very human.
Wants to be recognized
for something else.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>MIRABELLO: And if
we're in paradise,
maybe we become bored.
And maybe, again,
bliss is overrated.
Who knows?
>>REGINA: OK.
Well, so let's go to
hell then, all right?
>>MIRABELLO: OK, yes.
>>REGINA: So do not assume
that hell is necessarily
less pleasant than the
upper worlds, right?
>>MIRABELLO: That's found in
many-- in fact, by the way,
it's really curious.
Once again, hell develops
when farming develops.
>>REGINA: Yes, explain that.
>>MIRABELLO: You get
hunters and gatherers.
>>REGINA: That was interesting.
>>MIRABELLO: Well, you
get hunters and gatherers.
And then we develop agriculture.
Now, up to a couple of
decades ago, they always
assumed that the
farmer was an advance,
and they used to wonder what
took so long, because it's now
estimated maybe 99.9% of
our existence, hunters
and gatherers.
Why did it take the human race
so long to become farmers?
Now, when the farmer develops--
and oddly enough, they're
the first town dwellers.
We think of farmers as out in
the middle of nowhere today,
but in fact, you
couldn't plant a crop
in the middle of nowhere.
So they would build
these strongholds
and farm the land around it.
So they would
invent, eventually,
metalworking, writing, things we
consider positive developments.
But they also developed slavery.
The farmer develops
human sacrifice.
You don't find that among
hunters and gatherers.
Hierarchy, the tyrant, all
of this comes from farmers.
In fact, most Americans
don't realize,
we talk about the modernism
and the American way
of life, that's what primitive
people-- and I don't mean
primitive as a negative sense.
But gender equality,
lack of hierarchy,
no tyrants, everybody basically
is governed through consensus.
And oddly enough, even
in the issue of abortion
and infanticide,
farmers historically
practiced infanticide.
They kill babies
after they're born.
Romans would consider it
ridiculous, in fact, even
a crime, to murder a baby in
the womb before you look at it.
But if the child were
puny, misshapen, sick,
they killed it.
>>REGINA: They didn't
want the burden.
>>MIRABELLO: Right.
Ancient Greeks did
the same thing.
So the farmers
practiced infanticide
and think abortion
is stupid and evil.
But now the primitive
people practice abortion.
They have all kinds
of techniques.
>>REGINA: The hunters
and gatherers.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
And again, I shouldn't
use that term.
I think of primitive
actually as pure,
and I keep forgetting
that people often
view it as a different way.
They have techniques through
herbs and also-- now, again,
no one should try
this, it's dangerous--
>>REGINA: You're
not recommending it.
>>MIRABELLO: --through
belly manipulation
to cause the miscarriage.
>>REGINA: And certain herbs
that were used historically
in the Egyptians
cultures as well, yes.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
But our modern value
system is actually
reverting back,
essentially, to the hunting
and gathering moral system,
which is rather curious,
at that level--
in some ways.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MIRABELLO: But we've
kept the urban, the notion
of cooperation,
love, and so forth,
because we have
to live together.
>>REGINA: No, I
was going to say,
with that advancement
into agrarian societies,
how did they view the
afterlife compared, again, to--
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
That's where you get the idea
of a good place and a bad place.
Now, curiously enough, for
example, the Melanesian people
from the Pacific--
they [INAUDIBLE]
the aboriginal--
they put the afterlife
on this earth.
You never leave the earth.
And we're always thinking
of going somewhere else.
And one point-- and I,
again, refer to this--
is modern people always
think, if God exists
and if the dead exist,
there's somewhere else.
Now, 19th century people
did try to rationalize
this with science and say, it
could be in another dimension.
That emerges in
the 19th century.
The dead are there,
God is there.
But most people today think the
spirit is not really physical
anyway, and it's disconnected
from our modern world.
But the Melanesian people
think you go to the West.
And there's no place of torment.
In fact, again, to
refer to the aboriginal,
the soul is the size
of a grain of sand.
You go to a sacred site
where the ancestors go,
typically a waterfall or
a mountain or so forth.
And when the proper
woman comes along,
they select her and are born.
Now, it's interesting
that they say
the reason younger women
give birth and not older
is because the
soul wants to make
certain he's taken care of.
>>REGINA: I see.
So he needs someone there
for a longer period of time.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes, yes.
And it's nothing
to do with ethics.
They simply make a choice.
And frankly, when the aboriginal
people first saw the British,
they thought they were
the ancestors returning.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Interesting.
Now, let's go-- you touched
on it just a little bit,
but let's go to the
Egyptian Bardos a bit.
>>MIRABELLO: Mm-hmm.
The Tibetan Bardo, you mean?
>>REGINA: The
Tibetan Bardos, yes.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
It's just simply
the notion that--
>>REGINA: The Tibetan
Book of the Dead.
>>MIRABELLO: And
this is called--
and the connection,
everybody notices
the Egyptian Book of
the Dead and the Tibetan
Book of the Dead are very
similar in some respects.
>>REGINA: Yes.
One was passed from the other.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
Now, the Tibetans, which
by the way, for example,
Diamond Vehicle Buddhism
has the idea of--
it's actually, strangely
enough, tantra practices,
which is a short path.
Now, there's left-hand
tantra and right-hand tantra.
The Dalai Lama represents
right-hand tantra.
Left-hand tantra is basically
you achieve enlightenment
through orgies, drugs,
forbidden things, eating beef,
for example, and
forbidden foods.
But the Dalai Lama is from
the right-hand tantra,
which again, is information.
And they think--
and it's connected
to a large point of view.
Everything is thought,
according to this tradition.
There's no real
matter in energy.
This is a dream, in a sense.
>>REGINA: That we've created?
>>MIRABELLO: Yeah.
Well, in some reversions,
these are created.
In some versions, somebody
else has created it,
and it's a dream.
They call it
non-dualist thought.
Everything is thought.
So when the person dies,
the Tibetan Book of the Dead
gives really interesting details
what the dead person will
experience, and also how to get
the best possible next life,
or even release.
So it's what to look for.
And what's curious is
if they're correct--
and they say it's based
on-- now, they call it,
it's one of their termas.
These are hidden treasures
that are given by wise sages,
and they're hidden till the
human race is ready for it.
And they say, these are
people who consciously went
through the death
experience and came back
to tell us what occurs.
And if they are correct--
I'm not trying to say they
are, but if they're correct,
we're completely
misinterpreting what's going on.
>>REGINA: So, what do
they say is correct?
>>MIRABELLO: Well, for
example, I should mention--
some years ago, fascinating
book, Raymond Moody,
"Life After Life"--
>>REGINA: Yes, loved it.
>>MIRABELLO: --generated the
really interesting research
on near-death experience.
And Dr. Moody, who both has
an MD and a psychology PhD,
he noticed that people
were sharing experiences--
the light, often beckoning
figures, and so forth.
But if the Tibetans are correct,
we will all experience this,
but it's only the initial stage.
And if we don't understand
what we're seeing,
it's going to take us down.
They say that when
you first die,
you encounter the clear
light of the void, which
is brighter than 1,000 suns
and louder than 1,000 thunder
strikes.
And most people shrink back.
And by the way, it's
really interesting.
You don't have a
body, a mental body.
You're just in the light.
And most people
will shrink back,
and that starts
to take you down.
And then there's a secondary
experience with the light.
Most people will shrink back.
And then you start this process.
Now, you will see
beautiful entities.
And the Tibetans say,
if you're Christian,
you'll see angels or Jesus.
>>REGINA: You see what
you expect to see.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes, yes.
But they say, don't
approach them.
They're not really there.
And it could seduce
you off the proper way.
Now, this is really jarring to--
and I'm not saying the Tibetans
are right, and we're wrong,
but it's jarring.
Even if you see loved
ones over there,
you're not supposed
to embrace them.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Actually, I was told that
by some of the entities
that I've been associated with.
And they said, don't ever
touch the [INAUDIBLE],
when you're passing
through from dream time
back through that realm
into the body again.
And I remember
having one experience
that was profound one day,
where I ended up being aware.
I was passing through that
dimension to enter my body.
And this one woman wanted
my attention so badly.
And she was coming up,
walking up to me to touch me
because she wanted me
to acknowledge her.
And I remembered, don't touch.
Don't let her touch you.
And I acknowledged
her and told her
I could see, telepathically,
what a beautiful entity she'd
been in that life.
And she shrunk back.
And as soon as
she shrunk back, I
was able to then enter my
body back to a wakeful state.
And it was interesting to
have that awareness there,
even at that time.
>>MIRABELLO: Even Jesus
says, don't touch me yet,
during the Resurrection
descriptions.
>>REGINA: That's right.
Right.
>>MIRABELLO: Now, the
Tibetans say that all of this
is from the contents
of your mind.
That's why a Christian sees
this and a Muslim sees this.
And Westerners misunderstand
that, because they think,
well, this is just
an hallucination.
But remember, to
the Tibetans, this
is basically an hallucination.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MIRABELLO: So it's equally
real as this universe is to us.
And then they say,
after about seven,
eight days, you start to
see monstrous entities that
are frightening, that'll
rip off your head,
rip out your intestines,
rip out your viscera,
tear out your kidneys.
And they say, do not be
afraid because this is
from the content of your mind.
The important part through this
is to be calm and detached.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MIRABELLO: And then,
after this period,
you start to-- if
you haven't escaped,
and they give you information
how to achieve release,
and if you haven't
escaped at this point,
you're going to be
drawn into another body.
Now, it's actually
more complex than this,
but generally speaking
for most, there'll
be six possible
levels of rebirth.
And then they tell
you what to look for.
This will bring you
back as an animal.
This will take you back
as a god, as a demigod,
as a human, and a hellish
being, and a hungry ghost.
And oddly enough,
they view the human
as the best possible rebirth,
even above a god or a demigod.
>>REGINA: Yes, that
was interesting.
Why is that?
>>MIRABELLO: Because we
have the most choice.
If you're an animal, you're
plunged in ignorance.
Now, a lot of Westerners
idolize animals now,
because we've lost this.
And they think, this is
a beautiful experience.
I want to come back as my cat.
He gets to lie around.
>>REGINA: Somewhat
limited, but OK.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
But in fact, they would say
that's a bad one, because it
will require millions
of lives to get
back up to the human level.
If you come back as
a cat or a horse,
it's going to require millions
of lives to reach human level.
If you come back as
a god or a demigod,
they again have too much
power, and they're plunged in--
especially the demigods.
They're characterized
by jealousy.
They're trying to
go after the gods.
And you can't get out.
But the human has
the greatest choices.
He's in the middle.
It's kind of like the
"Goldilocks and the Three
Bears" sort of thing.
And we are in the middle part.
And it's viewed-- it usually
requires 8 million lives
to achieve human status.
And then this will be
the way to get out.
So they view being a human
as a special opportunity.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
OK.
So we're going to hop on to
Zoroastrians and their belief--
I loved it-- that a good man,
the soul spends three nights
on top of the body--
I have written
here-- and it's going
to be filled with joy, virgins.
Now, this is a really
interesting take
on the notion of the
beautiful, milky-skinned virgin
and what she says
to the departed.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
In fact, he sees--
and again, you were talking
about the good person dies,
and there's these
beautiful fragrant scents,
and he sees beautiful things,
and then he starts a journey.
Now, the reason that he is
there for roughly three days
is because that's when
decomposition begins.
So that's how they always
think that-- we think
of death as a quick,
you're now dead,
we can harvest your organs
and put them in someone else.
They think death is a
process, which it really is.
And then he begins
the journey and he
sees this beautiful female.
>>REGINA: 15 years old, right?
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
Oddly enough, it
shows the culture
that they're doing that young.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MIRABELLO: And he
thinks-- he tells her,
she's the most beautiful
damsel he's ever seen.
And she replies,
I am not a damsel.
I'm your beautiful thoughts,
your beautiful words,
and your beautiful deeds.
And he then goes to
a sort of a paradise.
By the way, the word
"paradise" is actually Persian.
That's where it comes
from in the Bible.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I mean, that's
fascinating because we've
been so overexposed to the
notions of the negatively
perceived aspects of Islamism,
where you risked your life
for Allah because of
the promise of virgins,
serviced by virgins.
This puts it in a much
more refined light,
that that embodiment
of everything
feminine and
beautiful is actually
the embodiment of the
goodness in yourself,
and that she's just
reflecting that back to you.
>>MIRABELLO: And
it's also interesting
that they depict the negative.
If you're evil, you see this
really revolting haggish
female.
And the deceased, who's
been evil, he says,
my gosh, you're so revolting.
And she replies, I'm
not a hag or a woman.
I'm your evil thoughts,
evil words, evil deeds.
And apparently it would
be reversed for the women.
So they would encounter perhaps
a beautiful handsome man
or revolting man.
>>REGINA: Yes.
No, I found that to be
actually quite beautiful.
Gosh, we only have
about five minutes left.
So we're going to skip
through some of these.
The Fijians believe
that in your afterlife
you remain the same as you
were at the time of death.
And I was pondering
that, because I've
seen other people,
including myself,
have had the opposite
experiences, where
the person who's died,
especially if they're elderly,
often comes back in a
younger form of themselves.
That's more preferred.
So take off on that one.
>>MIRABELLO: I think that
could also be encouragement to,
again, perhaps die younger.
>>REGINA: Yes.
You don't have to be
wrinkled in the afterlife.
>>MIRABELLO: I should mention,
what's a really beautiful
concept you'll find--
for example, Eurasia,
and then frankly
it seems to be a
Celtic tradition
that everything's reversed.
According to the Eurasians,
Siberian cultures,
it's all-- for example, it's
summer here, it's winter there.
If there's a famine here,
there's plenty there.
And you age backwards.
So if you go there
very old-- we also
seem to have been
a Celtic tradition.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>MIRABELLO: If you arrive
as an elderly person--
>>REGINA: In the after--
OK.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
Everything is reversed.
So here you grow older and
older, and in the afterlife,
you grow younger and younger.
So there would be
advantages, in some respects,
going there elderly, because
you become younger and younger.
And then, oddly enough,
you turn into a baby
again, being reborn.
The Ancient Greeks
actually noticed--
now incidentally, these are all
Indo-European cultures, hence
the similarities.
The ancient Greeks
noticed that--
not to be critical,
as I'm on my way there
myself, but elderly
people show a lot
of characteristics of babies.
For example, they
lose their hair,
they may lose their teeth,
they may lose control
over bowels and urine and so
forth, they can't walk anymore.
And the Greeks thought
this really old person
was turning into a baby again.
>>REGINA: Well,
that's interesting.
>>MIRABELLO: It's a beautiful
way of looking at it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I saw a documentary
on men and women.
When you're born, you develop.
And you age and you--
just before death.
And it was fascinating
because not only did it
show that same
characteristic, but it
showed the male and female
body start the same.
And from behind--
they showed them
all through developmental
stages naked from behind,
end up looking the same
behind before they pass on.
>>MIRABELLO: Even what we think
is tragedy of Alzheimer's, loss
of memory, babies cannot
form memories, really.
They forget.
And this is what's happening.
Now, it's just a beautiful way
of looking at the tragedy--
we view as the
tragedy of old age.
The Greeks view it as
you're being renewed.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK, a couple more here.
The Aztecs believed that if
a woman died in childbirth,
that was a very
esteemed way to go,
and she would come back
with a sun god, right?
>>MIRABELLO: Yes, yes.
I should mention, by
the way, that the idea--
a lot of warrior cultures
consider a woman's death
in childbirth as the
female equivalent of war.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MIRABELLO: Now, a
lot of Western scholars
because they're too
specialized, they
miss this among the Vikings.
They also have Freyja as
this field where women go.
She takes actually
half the slain.
Valhalla takes half
the heroic slain,
and then Freyja
gets another half.
And a lot of what modern
scholars-- because everybody's
so specialized-- think,
she's taking half of the men.
It's clearly a reference to
the female equivalent of war.
She's a fertility goddess, and
she's taking the heroic women.
Now, tragically we don't
realize this in the West.
On an average year, even
today, if you're not
in some really outlandish
war, more women
die giving birth
than men die in war.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>MIRABELLO: We've managed to
eliminate in the Western world.
Today it's really a
shocking experience
when a young woman or a
woman gives birth or dies
or dies during the process.
But in the Third World, it's
still quite common, sadly.
And hence the equation.
>>REGINA: Well, now, let's
reverse that view of it.
Plato believed that if you're
a cowardly man that you would
have to come back as a woman.
>>MIRABELLO: That's
clearly-- by the way,
I've always talked about
this in my classes,
not this particular point.
But we idealize
the Ancient Greeks,
but they're probably
the greatest misogynists
who have ever existed.
>>REGINA: True.
>>MIRABELLO: We're not even
certain if Greek women had
first names because--
>>REGINA: Interesting.
They were just property?
>>MIRABELLO: Well,
they were nicknames.
Phryne is actually-- she was
noted for beauty-- was actually
a prostitute.
That means toad.
Who's going to name
their daughter Toad?
And they often will not
translate these names.
And in fact, even the
Romans don't really
have names for girls.
They just feminize
the father's name.
So that's where
Julia comes from.
And if he had three daughters,
they were all named Julia.
It's kind of like George
Foreman, in a sense,
with naming all
the kids the same.
But the Greeks were really--
in fact, that's why they
institutionalized bisexuality,
because the Greeks--
now, all Greek men were expected
to marry and have children.
But they viewed
boys for pleasure.
Now, they'd all end
up in prison today
because they thought
sex between adult men
was actually weird to them.
But they viewed the elder adult
male having sex with a boy,
it was part of the education
process, strangely enough.
>>REGINA: Yes, indeed.
>>MIRABELLO: So
the reason Plato is
going to be expressing that
is-- it's a really anti-female
[INAUDIBLE].
≫>REGINA: It's quite an
insult. If you were a coward,
you were coming back as a woman.
So on that note, since
we're out of time,
which of all of these
mythologies and such
did you most
personally relate to,
or do you think
would be the most
pleasant, agreeable,
or logical of them all?
>>MIRABELLO: The
one thing I think--
personally speaking
now, not in the book.
But I'm really convinced
of this notion that--
and it's discussed
in many traditions--
that you will encounter
what you expect.
And that's why the
person's thoughts should
be directed at a certain way.
So people literally
should basically
study all the
traditions and say,
I'm going to go for this one.
>>REGINA: Choose, yeah.
>>MIRABELLO: This is the idea
that our minds are creating
all of this, if you will.
In a sense--
because I mentioned,
the Comanche really will
encounter the happy hunting
ground with the bison
and the cherry juice.
And the Viking will
find his Valhalla.
And the Christian
will find his heaven.
And the Jewish person will
go into the Garden of Eden,
which they believe--
they don't really
have a-- heaven is
for God in Judaism.
They believe that
the Garden of Eden
still exists because
Genesis points it out.
When Adam and Eve are expelled,
the Eden is still there.
So that's where they will go.
But the most important
part is, we understand
that if you don't plan for
retirement, if you don't lay up
a pension, if you don't invest,
that's immature behavior.
And I think if
you don't consider
the possibility there's another
level of existence after this
and you do nothing
to prepare, that's
reckless, immature,
childish behavior,
and should not be,
shall we say, practiced.
>>REGINA: I agree with you.
And one other thing
we didn't get to
and I think it was very
important-- we'll just throw it
out there-- is that it
was only when Christendom
came into being that eternal
hell and damnation ever
came up.
It doesn't exist anywhere else.
This notion of eternal suffering
is exclusively Christian.
>>MIRABELLO: It is curious that
we're not altogether certain
how that developed, by the way.
But clearly the first
time we see it--
>>REGINA: It
controls people well.
>>MIRABELLO: Yes.
Now I should
mention, although it
was among the early Christians,
there was debate on this issue.
For example, they had the
concept of Universalism origin
in the second century,
that he thought
that God was so good, ultimately
even Satan would be forgiven
and taken into heaven.
And by the way, we
talked about Zoroaster,
he talked in terms of
ultimately everybody is saved.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MIRABELLO: But oddly
enough, by the emergence--
you've got orthodoxy emerging
in the fourth and fifth century.
And it kind of
quashed these ideas.
I'm not altogether certain
why, but eternal damnation
seems to be--
>>REGINA: That's reckless
and irresponsible as well,
as not considering what
might be next for us.
I just forgot to
put that out there.
So again, Mark, it's
absolutely fascinating.
Thank you so much for
joining us on this.
I think people are going
to find it fascinating.
>>MIRABELLO: OK.
Thank you for the honor
for being on your show.
>>REGINA: Yes.
To enjoy this highly
researched and textured romp
through the
afterlife and beyond,
the book is titled "A Traveler's
Guide to the Afterlife."
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]